So let's see
how we can use this service container feature
in our concrete workflow here.
And by the way, you don't have
to run your job in a container
just to add a extra service container.
You can use service containers with the jobs
that are running in containers themselves
but you can also use service containers
in conjunction with jobs that run directly
on the runner machine.
So therefore here, I do have a job running in a container
but that is technically not needed.
But with such a job running in a container,
how can we add a service to this job?
Well, you do that by adding a extra services key.
And that's important, services, plural, not service
because you can add more than one service container
for a job.
And that's also important.
Services belong to a job, so to one specific job.
If different jobs need different services,
you do set them up with different services settings
for those different jobs.
So here I added services for this test job.
And then nested below services,
you add an identifier, a label for your service
for the first service you wanna add.
And here I wanna add a service
that runs a MongoDB database,
which can be used by these automated tests.
Therefore, I'll give this service a name of mongodb,
a label of mongodb
but as mentioned, this is totally up to you
and could be anything.
But here, mongodb makes a lot of sense.
Now, I could now add another-service here
if I wanted to but here I only need one service
and that is that mongodb service
but that service needs more configuration.
Therefore with one additional level of nesting,
you can add more service-specific keys.
And now the keys which you can add here
are clearly defined by GitHub Actions.
And the first key which you always must add
is the image key
because your services always run in containers.
So this is not up to you.
They don't run on the runner itself.
Services instead always run inside of images.
Therefore, you always have to add the image key
and then define your base image
that should be used by this service.
Now, which image you wanna use depends
on which service you're starting here.
Here I'm using the mongo image,
written like this
because that's another official image hosted
on Docker Hub.
Here you find that mongo image,
which gives you an environment
that comes with the MongoDB database pre-installed.
So an environment that runs a MongoDB server
with the MongoDB database on top of it.
Now, you can learn more about the image
and your configuration options here
but that is the image I'm using here.
However, this image now needs some additional configuration
in order to work correctly.
To be precise, here we also can,
and in this case also must add the env key.
It depends on the image
whether you need to add some environment variables
but this mongo image needs some environment variables.
To be precise, you learn in the official documentation here
that in the end,
this image here need two environment variables
that must be defined.
Now, this here generally
is a totally different definition file
but these two environment variables must be added as part
of our GitHub Actions definition as well
because this controls which username
and password will be used for connecting to that database
because keep in mind, here we're not connecting to it,
we're spinning up a new database instead
inside of that container
but of course, in order to then connect
to that database later
from our web app, which is used by these automated tests,
we need some credentials.
And here with these environment variables,
we define those credentials
that will be used for connecting.
So we configured that database
that will be started inside of the container
and we therefore also configure the credentials
that will be used for connecting.
And here one environment variable
that must be added for this services container
is the MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME,
and here I'll just set this to root.
And the other variable is this password variable,
which I will set to example here.
Now, these values are up to you
but they don't have to be too complex
because this is only a testing database
that's running on this GitHub Actions server
as long as our workflow is running.
So it can't really be used by anybody else
and it won't be online after the workflow finished.
So exposing these credentials here
is no problem unless it's the same credentials
you would be using for your production database,
which you, of course, shouldn't use here
for this testing database.
Instead here, you can have really simple dummy credentials,
like root and example.
Now, this also must be the credentials
that are used for connecting thereafter
and therefore, you should also use the same credentials here
for the environment variables
that are used by the steps,
which for example, run these automated tests
and the web server,
and which therefore are the environment variables
used in code.
And here we need the same credentials
so that the connection to this testing database here
can be established successfully.
So that's how we now define our service container here.
This now defines that we wanna use this mongo image,
which gives us a MongoDB server,
which should be initialized with these credentials.
And that service is then running side by side
whilst our other steps are executing.
Therefore, as our other steps start the web server,
for example, the web server will be able
to successfully connect to this database.
At least as soon as we also update that other data here,
the cluster address, for example,
because that's also important
and that's now also where it will matter
whether your job runs in a container or not.